Complex associational mapping is needed when you want to have any association between tables that are not in a simple has_many/has_one to belongs_to relationship, or when the normal convetions of active record are broken to make your code more readable. 

It is difficult to explain this without a visual aid,but I will try. If table A is connected to table B, which is connected to table C, you can connect table A to table C through the connection table B has with C. When you write "A has_many C's through B" the 'through B' portion should be the exact same as the "B has_many C's" relationship. 

When you go through an existing relationship there are some instances where you do not get to the final destination. If that is the case you call :source to tell ActiveRecord which of the available routes to take.

When you break a naming convention, that is when you want to use foreign_key or class name. When you declare that "bacons belongs_to user", active record will try to use an existing f_k it assumes is called user_id in table bacons. If the f_k is called something else, lets say chef_id, to make it more clear that the user is cooking or eating the bacon, we tell active record that "bacon belongs_to user, foreign_key chef_id", so it knows that the bacon and user tables are connected but on the chef_id key, not the user_id key. You could also say "bacon belongs_to chef" which would make active record look for the chef_id that is there, but then it would try assume there is a chefs table, which there isn't. To fix this we tell active record that, while it is looking at the chef_id, it will actually connect to the users table with a class name. This would look like "bacon belongs_to chef, class_name => User". 